# Building a Node Application

## Introduction

The goal of this post is to provide a simple example for using Node to create a Koa based Web Application.

### Why Node?

I tend to like Node because I like Javascript. The fact provides a bunch of advantages including being able to utilize the same skillset as the front-end frameworks we all use. 

### Why Koa?

There are 2 main Node web frameworks, the more popular Express and the focus of this post Koa. Both projects were started by [T.J. Holowaychuk](https://github.com/tj) and even he has moved on to serverless and Go. However, I tend to like Koa and Express for getting a project together, then converting it over to something more performance oriented.

## Prerequisites

1. NodeJS

## Getting started

Let’s start by running 

    npm init
    
example

    package name: (example) @jrg/myexample
    version: (1.0.0) 0.0.1
    description: My Sample Project
    entry point: (index.js) index.mjs
    test command: 
    git repository: 
    keywords: example
    author: Jackie Gleason
    license: (ISC) AGPL-3.0-or-later
    About to write to /Users/jackiegleason/Code/blog/posts/1.0/example/package.json:

    {
      "name": "@jrg/myexample",
      "version": "0.0.1",
      "description": "My Sample Project",
      "main": "index.mjs",
      "scripts": {
        "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
      },
      "keywords": [
        "example"
      ],
      "author": "Jackie Gleason",
      "license": "AGPL-3.0-or-later"
    }


    Is this OK? (yes) yes
    
This command will ask a bunch of questions and can be used to create a project. Answer them to your prerogative, but remember certain things are hard to change. I will eventually create a post about this if people want something. 

Next we need to install our core dependencies 

    npm install -S koa koa-mount koa-static
    
This will give us some Koa functionality that we will talk about later. Just notice you have a `node_modules` folder with the dependencies downloaded to the folder. To prevent issues I recommend adding this folder to the `.gitignore` file. There is also a `.npmrc` file that can control the files uploaded to npm. Please use this if you plan to publish the dependency, since we are focusing on a node application we can safely ignore it. 

Next I would edit the `package.json` file and in particular the `scripts` section it should look like this...

    "scripts": {
      "start": "node --experimental-modules index.mjs"
    },    
    
Notice the `--experimental-modules` this is meant to tell NodeJS to use a module loading system called ECMAScript Module Loading. For more on module loading see my [Modules Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/197ghih7KpeWAVzvPHiOnuucblMpCuEZjXs8OzwrzgnY/edit?usp=sharing).

Great now we can start making the server. To do this we will create a file called index.mjs that contains the following...

    import Koa from "koa";
    const port = process.env.PORT || 3000
    export class Application{
        async boot(){
            console.info("Booting...");
            this.app = new Koa();
            this.app.use((ctx)=>{
                ctx.body = "Hello World";
            });
            this.app.listen(port, () => console.log(`Started on port ${port}`));
        }
    }

    const app = new Application();
    const boot = app.boot()
    boot.then(()=>{
        console.log("Application started");
    }).catch((err)=>{
        console.error(`There was a fatal error ${err}`);
        process.exit(1);
    })
    
That is it to start to server just run `npm start` and you should see...

    ... example % npm start
    (node:22113) [DEP0139] DeprecationWarning: Calling process.umask() with no arguments is prone to race conditions and is a potential security vulnerability.
    (Use `node --trace-deprecation ...` to show where the warning was created)

    > @jrg/myexample@0.0.1 start /Users/jackiegleason/Code/blog/posts/1.0/example
    > node --experimental-modules index.mjs

    Booting...
    Application started
    Started on port 3000
    
Now if I go to the browser and go to http://localhost:3000 I Should see the `Hello World` we were using as the body. 

Congratulations you have made your first Node Application! The code is available [here](https://github.com/jrgleason/blog/tree/master/posts/1.0/example).